WEEK 5 - STUDENT INFORMATION SYSTEM
Encapsulation questions

Name       : Alfatih Mohammed Salih Ali
Student ID : 202504010010


1. Why are the variables declared as private?

They are declared private so that no other class can reach them directly.
Once studentID, name, cgpa and programme are private, the only code that can
touch them is the code inside the Student class itself. This is what the
scenario asked for: the university wants the student information stored
securely, so a student must not be able to open the object and change their
own CGPA. Making the fields private puts the Student class in control of its
own data instead of leaving it open to the whole program.


2. What happens if the variables are declared public?

If they are public, any class anywhere in the program can read and overwrite
them directly, for example:

        s1.cgpa = 4.0;

There is no check and no way to stop it. Three problems follow from this:

  - Invalid data can get in. Nothing prevents a CGPA of 9.9 or -3, even though
    a CGPA can only be between 0.00 and 4.00.
  - The class loses control of itself. The Student class can no longer promise
    that the data it holds is correct, because anyone can change it.
  - Maintenance becomes hard. If the field name or type is changed later, every
    line in the whole program that used it directly breaks.

In short, public fields mean the data is no longer protected.


3. Why do we use getters and setters?

Getters and setters give a controlled door into the object instead of leaving
the wall open. The field stays private, and the class decides what is allowed
through:

  - The setter can validate before it stores anything. For example setCGPA()
    could reject any value outside 0.00 to 4.00, so bad data never gets in.
  - The getter can return the value in a chosen format, or return it as
    read-only, so a value can be published without being made editable.
  - A field can be made read-only simply by writing a getter and no setter,
    which is useful for something like studentID that should never change
    after it is assigned.
  - The internal code can change later without breaking anything outside,
    because the rest of the program only ever calls getCGPA() and setCGPA(),
    not the field itself.

This is what encapsulation means in practice: the data is hidden, and access
to it goes through methods that the class controls.
